We We're talking. We're benching is what
we're doing. It's volume time and I'm
going to be benching. My plan is to
improve from last session, lots has been
going on behind the scenes. I'm trying
to get stronger. And as a result of
trying to get stronger, I'm lifting
heavier weights. And as I'm lifting
heavy weights, things start to slow
down. And this is what always happens
because the longer I spend on strength
training, the longer I spend away from
training other things. What are those
other things you may be asking? things
like hypertrophy and work capacity,
higher rep stuff that we don't really
develop so much when we're working on
low reps and heavy weights. So, a lot of
people think about strength training is
all about lifting heavy and low reps.
So, we categorize ourselves into two
different types of lifters. We got our
bodybuilders and our aesthetics athletes
or we've got our strength athletes like
power lifters and strongman or people
that just love to lift heavy. And we
know that for hypertrophy it's typically
higher rep range. Take that stuff close
to failure. And a lot of people say
things like bodybuilders aren't very
strong, which I disagree, but that's
another topic. And if you want to get
strong, you need to be lifting heavy.
You need to be lifting lower reps. So
people think you need to be on one camp
or another. Well, that's not entirely
true. Quite often the strongest athletes
in the world understand how to phase
their training in separate blocks over
the long-term plan. And including bouts
or phases of higher rep work allows you
to build more muscle, which in turn
allows you to turn that bigger muscle
into stronger muscle. Because the larger
the muscle size, the larger the
potential for strength gain. And if all
you do is work on low reps and high
loads, you are neglecting the work that
builds the most muscle. Spending too
much time away from that causes you to
slow down your muscle building
progression and therefore could be the
exact reason why you have plateaued in
your strength, which happens to me all
the time. I often get carried away with
strength work and go really really heavy
for too often with such low reps that I
start neglecting all of the other stuff
and all of a sudden I reach a screeching
halt or a plateau and I stop
progressing. And that's some part of my
thought process. What I'm considering my
long-term plans is phasing in the high
rep work. And that's where I've landed
on right now. So, I got to a point with
lifting really, really heavy and
everything started hurting. So, that's
another bad thing when you're always
only lifting heavy all the time. It's
just painful on your joints after a
while. It's not because it's unsafe,
especially because I'm 43 that I feel it
a little bit more these days. It doesn't
mean you can't progress. It just means
you see the signs a lot clearer. A
result of that, the only work that I
could do was lighter loads and higher
reps. And that's why I want to talk
about this. This is pretty much the
phase life forced me to go back to the
phase that I absolutely needed, which
was high rep work, building more muscle.
So, the last couple of weeks, I started
doing sets of 15. And I'm not going to
do 15s today. So, I did 140 kg for 15.
And then I thought I was not going to do
15s again. I was just going to keep on
adding 10 kg and doing less reps. So I
thought 150 kg would probably be you
know 12 to 14 reps. I ended up getting
15 reps of 150 kg. So I thought well the
logical progression I'm jumping in 10 is
to go to 160 kg. Don't know what the
goal is. All I can tell you is the best
that I have done on 160 kg in years. So
since I've turned 40 is 11 reps. So of
course that means I want to beat 11 reps
today. If I've done 150 kg for 15 reps,
I should be able to get 12 on 160. So,
that's my thought process and therefore
that's my goal for today. So, let's get
into it. I've just warmed up with a
whole bunch of dumbbell work, high rep
work, and my first set on the barbell is
going to be 70 kg and I'm going to take
jumps up to 160 kg, which will be my
first top set. Let's do it.
[Music]
See?
[Applause]
Yes.
>> Yes. Thank you.
Oh,
>> good one, bro.
>> We're happy with that.
>> Good, huh? Goodness gracious. All right.
So,
that you've already done that is
the best I've done is many, many years
ago when I was super big and fat,
over 110 kg. So I weigh about 103 at the
moment and I did 12 repetitions
which is the best I've done since I've
been over 40 years old which is a really
nice thing that I'm teaching people
about human potential and when well
particularly males start well they reach
their strength peak and a lot of the
times I was saying things like at the
age of 38 in my opinion and that's not
just based on myself I mean I feel like
I was at my strength peak at around that
age, but guys like Andre Milanachev at
the time who was the all-time world
record holding powerlifter and Brian
Shaw at the time when he was at his
peak, Zaduna Seiscus at the time when he
was at his peak is all around 38 years
old. Now, I moved on to get stronger,
but to get stronger was a bit of a
process, and it was a slower progression
from 38 to 40, but I still got stronger,
but I had to put on a bunch of weight to
do that, which is why I thought, yeah,
am I really uh, you know, beyond my peak
or am I peaking later
or is it just that I'm getting bigger?
And, you know, the conclusion that I
came to is 38 is where you kind of like
accelerate up to 38. This is with men.
With women, I believe they can keep on
going for a little bit longer than men,
but that's another topic. So, anyhow,
now at the age of 43,
I kind of backed away from powerlifting
and I was telling myself that I'm no
longer a powerlifter and my training
sessions were kind of
no goal. I was never working towards a
competition. And so, my motivation was
really, really low. and I'd come into
the training sessions and everything
felt hard and I just, you know, I didn't
enjoy my training as much. Anyway, only
recently, I'd say in the last year or
so, I started prioritizing my training
again. And now I'm back to a point where
I'm not eating as much food. I'm a
lighter body weight
and I'm progressing and kind of now I'm
kind of rewiring my thought process with
how old are we when we reach our
strength peak. And I think it's not 38
anymore. I think we can continue beyond
that. But the rules change. The rules
change. So, of course, as I'm getting
older, I don't consider myself old. Not
yet. But I'm saying I'm older than what
I was when I was a competitive
powerlifter. And I didn't have to worry
much as much about things like joint
pain, spending longer time on my
warm-ups, doing excessive amounts of
volume that my body was able to recover
from then. So, here's how it's changed
now. I do spend more time on warm-ups.
My joints don't like it when I come in
cold and start lifting heavy. It takes
longer to get to that point, but I'm
still able to get to that point, which
is nice. Copious amounts of volume. My
body doesn't like it as much. So, I've
started to reduce the amounts of volume
to be able to handle what I believe my
work capacity is, and I'm back to
progressing again. So, there's slight
changes that you should make as your
body evolves through life, but it
doesn't mean you've stopped progressing.
Anyway, so my thoughts on that, women,
the rules are different like a yin g.
So, I think that women get to progress
for a lot longer than men. Don't know
why. That's just in my experience.
That's not based on science. That's
purely anecdotal. And lucky girls. But
I'm very happy with that. 160 kgs for
12. What am I going to do next? I'm
going to take my gains and run. That's
what I'm going to do. That's kind of a
rule that I have whenever I hit certain
milestones is don't try and back it up.
Don't try and, you know, do two PRs in a
row. So, it doesn't mean I'm going to
stop. I'm going to move straight onto my
accessory exercises. 43 years old, man.
Very nice. Especially considering I was
injured last week. Well, for the last
few weeks, my shoulders were hurting me
and I was like, ah, you know, whatever
it is, I have to stop. Anyway, then I
came back to the volume and yeah, better
than ever. By one rep max, the best I've
done is 210 kg. Based on that, like I
think I'm stronger than 210. My goal is
220 and I believe I'm stronger. I think
I'm at about 215 now. If I was on a good
day and everything was peaked nicely, I
think 215. Uh, and the goal is 220, so
I'm very close.
So secondary exercises for today. This
is kind of new territory for me because
160 kg for 12 reps, that's kind of, you
know, PB territory. So I quit while I'm
ahead. Whenever I hit a PB or a PR,
however you like it, uh that's the most
that I've done at this body weight, you
know, for many years. So that's a big
milestone for me for now. Whenever I do
something like that, quite often I get
quite excited and I get a little bit of
an adrenaline dump after that. And then
when I try and back that up and do
another set of it, the dump of
adrenaline or the dump of energy,
whatever you like to call it, makes me
not perform as well on the secondary
set. So, it's something that I always do
with myself and with the people that I
work with is if you hit a massive
number, a big milestone or something
that makes you excited, I say take your
gains and run. So, that's what I'm
doing, which is why I'm not doing any
more bench press work. And what I'm
doing instead is a thing that typically
I say not to do, which is avoid exercise
redundancy, which is if you're doing the
first exercise on a flat bench press, go
and do a different joint angle that you
neglected in that main movement, right?
So go and do incline or overhead or
something that hits the pecs in a
different position. And what I'm doing
now is where I guess there's an
exception to every rule. So I'm going to
be doing flat dumbbell press. Now,
here's two reasons why it's an
exception. One is because I only did one
top set, right? So, I still want to
develop my horizontal push strength, you
know, with a lower intensity movement.
So, it's not really exercise redundancy
because I haven't trained that first
movement enough. You know, exercise
redundancy is you go horizontal push and
then you go into more flat dumbbell
pressing, which is a horizontal push
again, and then machine pressing, which
is a horizontal push again, and then a
push-up, which is a horizontal push
again. It's all the same joint angle and
range of motion and targeting the muscle
in the same way, but just with a
different implement, going from barbell
to dumbbells. Now, people say don't do
that because the first exercise of the
day, you kind of like that's where you
get the most return on investment. So,
you're working pretty hard on that first
exercise and usually we do multiple sets
to the point where that's enough work on
that movement pattern. Now, we need to
move on. But actually, I've only done
one set on that movement pattern. So,
arguably, it's not enough work on that
movement pattern. So, this is where I am
not avoiding exercise redundancy. I'm
targeting the movement that needs work.
Now, here's the next reason why I'm
doing this movement pattern is because
my shoulder, the instability in my
shoulder from don't know exactly what
caused the pain. I don't know if it was
a strange unrackck that put me out of
position and it just jolted, but since
then it hurt my shoulder and coming back
and doing dumbbell work, the stability
or instability of a dumbbell was
aggravating my shoulder. So, I've
haven't done dumbbell work um for the
last couple of weeks, but now my
shoulder's feeling great and I just did
a warm-up set of 37 12 kilograms. uh my
my work set I'm going to be working on
50 kg today. So I believe I'm in a
position where my shoulder's good enough
to be doing dumbbell work. So I'm going
to gently reintroduce it. Now here's
another thing that I want to talk to you
about with hypertrophy work for a
strength athlete versus hypertrophy work
for a bodybuilder. Right? So a lot of
people think hypertrophy just means
bodybuilding. Um not always. So a
bodybuilder hypertrophy strength
strength athlete should train for
hypertrophy. But we always need to
factor in specificity for a bodybuilder.
They don't need to have any specific
performance. They just need to have a
specific aesthetic. So they need to
develop certain muscles, pecs, deltoids,
should triceps. That's the muscles that
are involved in this bench press day.
Usually it's pecs. So the way that I
would prescribe a pressing action, so a
bench press for a bodybuilder compared
to a bench press for a strength athlete
in a hypertrophy phase has slight
differences. And I'm going to teach you
a little bit about elbow position. So a
discussion that I've had a lot with
people in my field regarding strength
training. When I give powerlifting style
bench press to, you know, rugby players
or combat athletes, a lot of people talk
about specificity for a push pattern for
athletes is never out here. It's kind of
like elbow by the side and like this is
how you push. So if you were to push
someone in rugby or or to to fend or to
throw a punch, the elbows are in, right?
or let's just say, you know, I hate to
use the word, but functionality,
functional strength. So, let's just say
when would you need the push pattern to
be strong in the push pattern from a
functional standpoint. Let's just say
your car broke down and you need to roll
it down the hill. Imagine getting out of
the car and pushing the car. So, you put
it in neutral, take the handbrake off
and push it. How are you going to push
the car? You going to do it wide like a
wide grip bench press or, you know, like
think about the natural push pattern is
just is push, right? So, look at my the
angle of my upper arm or my elbows.
they're kind of tucked. So, a lot of the
times when I teach a strength specific
press pattern, that's the elbow angle,
right? But I've been doing a lot of, you
know, obser observing with bodybuilders
at the highest level and watching how
they flare their elbows when they do
their hypertrophy work for pec
development. And a lot of the top level
bodybuilders have their elbows flared.
So, is that good or bad? Well, neither
and both. The idea behind flaring the
elbows is creating more tension and
targeting the pec at the longer length
or the greater stretch, which some
people talk about. That's the position
that produces more hypertrophy when you
target the muscle at its full stretch
position. So, in my opinion, both of
these methods have their merits. From a
hypertrophy standpoint, targeting the
pecs in the fully stretched position can
have some great hypertrophy benefits. To
do that, you need to flare your elbows.
Now, here's a discussion that I'm having
when I'm observing or working towards
building strength athletes so they're
strong in all angles to reduce risk of
injury. What's one of the biggest
injuries in a powerlifting competition,
especially with a bench press? It's a
pec tear. Where does it happen? It
happens where the pecs at the greatest
stretch, which is usually where the
barbell is on the chest, regardless of
where the elbows are. That's why they
say tuck the elbows so it's not as much
tension, but it's still when the bar's
on the on the chest, that's when it's at
the greatest stretch. So therefore,
what's a great way to strengthen your
body to avoid these things? One is work
on technique always. Two, what about
strengthening the pecs in the fully
lengthened position? So a lot of people
resort to things like dumbbell flies as
a great tool for strengthening the pecs
in the fully stretched position. And I
agree, but it loses the loadability
factor, right? So if you got a 200 plus
kilogram bench press, how much can you
do with dumbbell flies? Still not much.
Like I I in my opinion any exercise gets
your body strong and it has some
carryover, but the loads are not high
enough to have a huge carryover to the
specific demands of one rep max
benching. So this is what I'm going to
start including more of in my program
and starting with today. So I'm going to
be doing a little bit more of a flared
position for my dumbbell press so that
it positions the pec in a more
lengthened or stretched position, which
is how bodybuilders do it. So that's
what my goal is today.
[Applause]
That was surprisingly hard. I can
normally do about 20 reps on 50 kg
dumbbells. Last time I did probably
more. Last time I did 60s, I did 15
reps, but that's when I used my neutral
grip and bang it. So, just then I was
definitely more tentative because my
shoulder has been a little bit funny.
So, I didn't want to just bang it out.
Additionally, that flared elbow, I can
really feel the increased tension or the
increased stretch I'm placing on the
peg,
which
I guess kind of tells me that I need it,
right? So, for that, that shouldn't feel
like a big stretch. It's unfamiliar to
me because I've never really in a long
time I've never really challenged my
pecs in that fully lengthened position
like that. So it feels like if I was too
aggressive and went too heavy and you
know was more explosive with it. You
know that's how you know I could
potentially injure my peg. So that's why
I'm being a little bit cautious and
focusing on the stretch.
One good thing about this is I believe
my pecs are very very tight and the best
indication of that is gone. Have a look
at me squat. How I hold the bar so wide.
There's a lot of muscles involved in why
in my tight shoulders and why I can't
grab the bar a bit closer than that. But
pecs are definitely a huge contributor.
One of the best ways to stretch a muscle
is taking it through its full range of
motion under load. So rather than just
passively stretching my pecs, doing a
bench press like this I believe is doing
a lot of amazing things for me. It's
building my strength of the pec in the
fully stretched position where which is
where it's the weakest and most
vulnerable as well as improving my
flexibility in my pecs. So it's a two in
one. That was kind of hard but easy
enough for me to do multiple sets. I'll
probably go for two more sets of this.
[Applause]
I'll do one more set of that. Few little
discussions, side discussions when we're
talking about rep ranges, appropriate
rep ranges for hypertrophy. There's a
lot of discussion about low reps, you
know, low volume training camp, saying
that it's a waste of time doing high
reps because it's the discussion is it's
the last five reps of the effective reps
and anything before that is a waste of
energy. Therefore, don't do the first
five reps. Choose a load that's heavy
enough to only do five reps or six reps
or something with low rep range. And
that's the optimal rep range and loads
for optimal hypertrophy. So therefore,
for me with that technique, what do I
think I'd be able to do appropriately
for five reps? Maybe 65 kg. But I'll
tell you now, like when I'm at the last
five reps there, even though I didn't go
to complete fail, it's deceiving cuz I
can feel the weight's coming up easy.
It's coming up fast. But then on the
10th rep, I feel like it's actually
quite challenging. And maybe I've got a
rep. I'm sure I've got a rep, maybe
maybe two more, but probably not. So,
I'd say it's one rep in reserve. It's
deceiving cuz I know it's moving fast
and it's it feels easy for the first
five, but that's the whole idea of using
high reps for hypertrophy is because
we're positioning our body in a
non-efficient way. So, flaring the
elbows like this is not as efficient as
tucking the elbows. When you tuck the
elbows, I'm positioning the body in a
way that I'm spreading the load evenly
across my delts, my triceps, and my
pecs. When I'm flaring my elbows, it's
placing more of the load on the pegs.
So, when you're doing that, it's a more
compromised position. Which is why when
you're doing exercises where you're
attempting to isolate a muscle more,
it's weaker. It's less efficient. The
more efficient way is to include more
muscles, more body parts. The less
efficient way, which is how bodybuilders
train, their goal is to not be
efficient. efficient as something like a
sumo deadlift where it's an optimal
lever to shift the heaviest loads.
That's why you can lift more loads in a
sumo than a Romanian deadlift. Romanian
deadlift is far less efficient, but it's
a lot better for muscle hypertrophy of
the deadlift patterns. Sumo deadlift is
spreading the weight over too many
muscles to say great hypertrophy
exercise. It's a great maybe it's a
decent general hypertrophy exercise.
Which muscle are you building? I don't
know. Maybe it's legs, maybe it's
hamstrings, maybe it's glutes, maybe
it's adductors, maybe it's back. I don't
know. It's too general. But bodybuilders
don't like general hypertrophy. They
like specific hypertrophy. Which is why
bodybuilders would choose an RDL where
they're targeting like glutes or
hamstrings rather than general body. I
don't know. Right? So that's the whole
idea behind choosing the appropriate rep
range for the specific exercise. If
you're doing a squat low bar, wide
stance like a powerlifter, you're
putting as much of your body and as much
of your muscles under that weight as
possible and you're spreading the load
evenly. Go for low reps. One to five
reps. Perfect. Fantastic. In fact, I
like to really keep my squats under kind
of six rep range and not go beyond that.
That's where it's a complex movement and
deserves lower reps and higher
concentration and higher loads, but more
isolated exercises. Choose the
appropriate rep range. So, I'm going for
10. You know, I think for hypertrophy
for that exercise, you know, the most
stimulating rep range for me would
probably be minimum of eight reps, like
eights to twelves. I think that's the
sweet spot. So, when you're choosing rep
ranges for hypertrophy and people say
you need to go uh heavy, otherwise if
you're doing too light, you're wasting,
you know, yeah, you're reaching the same
end destination, which is taking the
movement close to fail, which is where
most of the muscle muscle growth occurs.
But when you're doing higher reps, the
first reps are just a waste of energy. I
disagree. It puts you in a position to
be able to safely perform the set, take
the muscle to the appropriate proximity
to failure, which is the important part
of muscle building, and avoid injury.
So, I'm going to do one more set and
then I'll do some back work and then
I'll be done.
Okay, that's all of my chest work done.
Top set of bench press, 160 for 12. Nice
little PB for this stage of my life. And
three back down sets with my hypertrophy
style of flat dumbbell pressing. Now,
I'm going to go and do some accessory
back work and some arms. Pretty boring
stuff. But I'm going to be talking to
you guys more about how to build a base
for your long-term strength goals and
how building a base means working on
other things besides strength. So, right
now, higher volume, the focus is
hypertrophy. And I've actually made an
entire video on how to set out your
long-term program to maximize your bench
press. So, I'll put that up in the links
around here. So, click on that link if
you want to know what to watch next. And
that's going to take you through how I
program to get a good bench press
ultimately over the long term because it
is a long-term thing. Takes time to get
strong. So, go and check that out. In
the meantime, I'm going to be giving you
guys some more education on how to train
for hypertrophy or muscle building as a
strength athlete compared to as a
bodybuilder because there are
differences and that's going to be
coming up next. So, if there's anything
else you want me to talk about, pop it
in the comments section. But I hope you
enjoyed that. Until next time.